ReferenceAbout the situation among international students studying in KievUpon the arrival of operational and official data about the developments at Chernobyl NPS a lively discussion occurred with the international students and graduate students studying in Kiev, who are from capitalist, developing, and socialist countries. The vast majority of internationals correctly interpreted the Soviet government's official message heard on the radio and television about the accident at the Nuclear Power Plant, and they express condolences for victims and their families. The situation among the specific category of people from data of agents – diplomats, Sergey, Oleg, open contacts Akhmada, and Drakaras – as a whole is normal. Classes are being held according to schedule.However, on the part of individual foreigners there is a proliferation of panicked words and tendentious interpretations towards the reason for the accident at the NPS.A range of foreigners are expressing wild guesses, such as that the reason for the accidentwas not a technological malfunction but sabotage. A student in his third year at Kiev Medical Institute said in a conversation with compatriots, “In modern nuclear power plants there are around 30 systems for protection from destruction. In this case, none of them worked. This means it was sabotage.”Of a similar point of view is El Amin Abdala, a fifth year student at Kiev Medical Institute (KMI) from Lebanon, and a first year student from Syria.A student in the second year at KMI, from Syria, Sultan Aiman, stated as follows “In any country there are people who are unhappy with their government. In my opinion this happened attheir hands.”Separate reactionary-minded foreigners, mainly from among those who profess the Muslim religion consider that the accident was “God’s punishment.” The following are characteristic of the opinions expressed by foreigners:-“They were punished by God because they had planned to kill others.” Siblani Mohammed, 5th year, Lebanon, Student at KMI.-“This was done by God to punish the Communists.” Hoder Djaber, Lebanon, Student at Kiev Engineering-Construction Institute (KECI).-“God does not have stones to throw at the infidels, but he does have people who are readyto do his will.”  Issa Belal, Lebanon, KECI.-“The more that God punishes communists, the more they die, the better.” Malongo, Gabon, first year student at KMI.  -“If this was done by man, then he will have a place in paradise.” Hassan Mubarek, first year student at Kiev Aviation Academy.-“This man is a hero”. Abdel Larvish, third year student at KMI, Syria.
Certainly some of the foreigners expressed assumptions that in the case of the Chernobyl NPS it was a response by the Americans as revenge for the crash of the first reusable American space shuttle “Challenger.” By developing ideas the students at KECI Fakih Jihad, Lebanon, (object DOR Mufti) and Nabil Hamzeh, Syria, spread among compatriots provocative words about the possibility of U.S. vengeful actions against the USSR. Most of the information about the actual extent of the consequences of the accident at the Chernobyl NPS interest foreign students and residential physicians at the medical educational institutions in Kiev (KMI, KMU-1, and NII), who pass on practice at medical departments to leading city and oblast hospitals. Regarding examinations at Hospital No. 14 of the October Revolution, where more than 300 foreigners work and train, we are focused on Pechersky RO KGB on April 29th of the same year. Agents and trusted confidants were previously instructed about the plan to identify the individuals distributing these provocative and panicked words, as well as on the adoption of measures to localize possibly negative manifestations during the celebration between the 1st and 9th of May. Head of Division 3, Division 5, Ukrainian KGBMajor Komarevich