NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20506
SECRET/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY
ACTION
MEMORANDUM FOR JOHN M. POINDEXTER
May 7, 1986
FROM: JACK MATLOCK
SUBJECT: A Strategy for U.S.-Soviet Relations
Before leaving for Tokyo, you asked me to think about possible
trade-offs to consider in our negotiations with the Soviets. I
have also been working on a re-draft of NSDD-75 as you requested,
but find that we will probably need some additional guidance
before we can get a draft into reasonable shape to show you.
Before I get into these matters, however, let me summarize the
current situation as I see it, as background for the various
recommendations which will follow.
Current Situation
1. The Soviets are playing games with the summit date and
conducting a very public propaganda campaign on arms control in
part to bring pressure to bear on us and to place strains on the
Alliance, but also in part because Gorbachev has not yet really
consolidated his power and has been unable to obtain agreement
how (and perhaps whether) to proceed in concrete negotiations
with us.
2. Up until the Chernobyl disaster, the Soviet propaganda
campaign was beginning to make inroads in the broad public in
Europe: what they saw was the image of a Soviet leader making
proposal after proposal for "peace" and the President always
saying "no." A distorted, inaccurate -- even ridicuous --
impression, but one obtained by headline readers who do not
understand the precise issues and probably never will.
3. The Soviet handling of the Chernobyl disaster has set this
Soviet campaign back in a dramatic way, but its impact may not
lasting. The net effect a few months from now could be an
upsurge in generalized anti-nuclear sentiments, unless we act
rapidly to lead public opinion.
on
be
4. The PR fiasco which Chernobyl represents will, for a time,
make the Soviets very testy. They will be inclined to lash out
verbally in very belligerent ways. But their belligerence is
unlikely to lead to dangerous moves. Nevertheless, they will be
SECRET/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY : Fole-14/4738857 Rus 3/20/13
SEÇRET/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY
-2-
careful to avoid any appearance of caving into to US pressure
during a time when they are perceived as being in a weak
position.
5. We have given Gorbachev every opportunity to negotiate in
private on the relevant issues, and up to now he has not been
willing (or able) to do so. We need to keep these offers open,
but at the same time step up our own public campaign. We must
demonstrate to him that he does not have the PR field to himself,
and if he wants results he most get his act together and come to
the table with negotiable positions.
6. For this reason, I believe we need a combination of private
negotiating strategies and a highly public campaign to put the
President out with some dramatic proposals. They need not be
radically different from our current policies, but should build
on them and be presented as new, even if they are largely
repackaging.
In this effort, we should be careful about using the Chernobyl
disaster too directly. To appear to be exploiting it could
backfire with the public eventually (particularly in Europe) if
it appeared that we were just berating the Soviets to avoid
negotiation. Obvious and direct expoloitation of the issue also
could push Gorbachev even further into a corner and delay his
ability to draw rational conclusions from the disaster, including
the desirability of getting on with arms reduction negotiations
with us. But the disaster is on everybody's mind -- particularly
in Europe -- and there are ways we can capitalize on this
indirectly.
In this effort, we should couch our proposals so that.
rhetorically they seem responsive to at least some of Gorbachev's
proposals. This is not a matter of going easy on him (which he
certainly does not deserve), but rather of giving him enough
wiggle room to claim some "achievements" at home. So long as
what he gets is cosmetic, this can serve our interests (and
bolster the President's image in Western Europe).
The Public Track
We should some areas where the immediately try to identify
President can make some "new" proposals. When we have identified
them, we must plan a strategy for getting them out to the public:
the timing of the speeches and/or announcements and the follow-up
to insure proper public attention.
If we are really serious about a given proposal, we should
present it to the Soviets a few days in advance privately.
However, we should not rule out some ideas, less serious, which
SECRÉT/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY
SECRET/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY
-3-
we will want to float by surprise -- just to show that we too can
play that game if that is the way the Soviets want it.
Some ideas which come to mind as worth careful thought are the
following:
1. Civilian nuclear power plants: Propose a negotiation to
establish international safety standards and an international
system of monitoring for safety. (We have asked the State
working group to look at this possibility, but it may take a
formal memo to ensure that it gets proper attention. I am
sending a separate memo setting forh the idea in more detail.)
2. START/SDI: Reiterate our current START proposals in simple
form (without pointing out that it is our old proposal), along
with some indication of how we would solve the defensive weapons
problem. (For example, the President could state that we are
willing to negotiate verifiable measures to prevent use of
defensive systems to increase a first-strike potential and to ban
deployment of weapons of mass destruction in space; he might also
offer a formal commitment to negotiate for a specified period
should strategic defense systems prove feasible, survivable and
cost-effective.)
a
3. Nuclear Testing: Acknowledge importance of issue and propose
that our specialists meet to review each other's proposals, with
view toward progressive, verifiable limitations on testing,
commensurate with the pace of reductions of offensive weapons.
(Note: this is not really new, but the public does not grasp
these elements of our position since they have usually been
buried in a lot of other detail in our proposals and have not
been stressed by press accounts.)
Alternatively, if it proves possible to propose a time-limited
stand-down on both nuclear testing and missile testing, this
could be very dramatic, and would provide an organic link between
START and testing.
4. Chemical Weapons: We should give our CW draft higher
visibility by reemphasizing the need for prompt agreement on
effective verification. This could take the form of a "proposal"
for verification which would in effect summarize the provisions
in our current draft -- a matter which has not received much
public attention (most people don't even know that we have
proposed a CW ban).
5. Biological Weapons: We might consider proposing an
international verification regime to supplement the 1972
Biological Weapons Convention. This would address a real problem
which has been largely swept under the rug (the virtual certainty
that the Soviets have retained a BW capability) and utilize the
SECRET/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY
SECRET/SENSITIVE/EYES ONI,Y
-4-
renewed concerns raised by Soviet secrecy as a result of their
handling of Chernobyl.
6. Ideally, we should also include some proposals (or spin-off
proposals from our previous ones) in the regional conflict area
and the area of increasing contacts and the flow of information.
A Comprehensive Proposal to Eliminate Nuclear Weapons?
The most ambitious way to present our ideas would be to take off
from the President's desire to eliminate nuclear weapons and
Gorbachev's January 15 proposal and present a comprehensive
proposal of our own. This would be far more difficult to staff
than the piecemeal proposals listed above, but -- at least
conceptually -- it could have some advantages:
1. It could provide a framework for working our entire four-part
agenda into the "peace" theme.
2. It would provide a vehicle for making clear not only why but
how arms reduction is related to regional conflict, openness,
human rights, and the like.
3. It would answer the charge that the President is either not
serious about the elimination of nuclear weapons, or has not
thought through how it can be done.
4. It would provide a clear basis for retaining nuclear weapons
and testing until such time as a series of conditions have been
met -- many outside the strict arms control field.
5. It could be designed to appear constructively responsive to
Gorbachev's initiative.
6. It would make a very big splash if we took special efforts to
play it up, and has the potential for keeping the President out
front as the major champion of peace and arms reduction.
It has obvious downsides as well, since if we attempt to put.
together such a grandiose scheme quickly, we could inadvertently
create problems for ourselves in some specific negotiations. And
it might prove impossible to overcome bureaucratic objections to
the individual parts. Nevertheless, I have outlined at Tab II a
notional plan of what such a proposal might look like.
The Private Track
While pressing our case publicly with vigor, we should also keep
the private negotiating track active, in order to make clear to
the Soviet leadership that we are willing to negotiate when they
SECRET/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY
SECRÉT/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY
-5-
are. We of course will have the regular sessions of NST, CDE,
MBFR and the like, but should keep hammering at the Soviets in
more direct channels as well.
If the President does not receive a reply from Gorbachev to his
letters by next week, I believe he should consider sending a
brier private note simply saying that he remains ready for
serious negotiation in the various areas they both have
discussed, and expressing the hope that Gorbachev will soon
respond to his ideas. At least implicitly, he might point out
the incongruity of spending so much time in public statements and
not being able to respond officially to actual proposals.
Organizing for the Push
As we give thought as to how we conduct both our public and
private efforts, we should also give careful thought to how we
can best plan and conduct them in coordinated fashion. We first
need to develop a comprehensive plan for the President's
approval, then put into place a mechanism for seeingthat it is
carried out, responsibly and with discipline.
RECOMMENDATION:
That you note your reaction to the ideas set forth and indicate
any instructions for further action or consultation on my part.
Attachments:
Approve
Tab I Potential Trade-Offs
Disapprove _
Tab II Notional Proposal for Elimination of Nuclear Weapons
Tab III Draft Letter to Gorbachev
SECRÉT/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY
SECRET/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY
POTENTIAL TRADE-OFFS IN US-SOVIET NEGOTIATIONS
START-SDI:
It is clear that the Soviets eventually will require at least a
cosmetic link to strategic defensive systems if they agree to the
50% reduction of strategic weapons. There are probably several
ways that this can be done without impinging on a robust. SDI
research program. Example:
In return for Soviet acceptance of a 50% reduction of strategic
nuclear weapons in categories acceptable to us, one or some
combination of the following:
-- reaffirm that U.S. program will follow "strict"
interpretation of ABM Treaty for specified number of years;
-- exclude testiny and deployment of certain types of
systems for a specified time period;
-- open laboratories -- or even joint research -- in some
specific areas (would have to be coupled with right to challenge
inspection of facilities suspected of being withheld from
inspection or joint work);
-- exclude testing or deploying in orbit weapons of mass
destruction;
-- make commitment to negotiate for specific period (e.g.,
two years) before deploying any strategic defense system (or,
perhaps, any space-based strategic defense system);
-- (possibly): undertake commitment to reduce or eliminate
any strategic weapons with prompt hard-target kill capability
simultaneously with deployment of SDI systems. (Probably
inadvisable and impossible to negotiate in the sort of specific
terms to make it meaningful; however, some thought might be given
to the pros and cons of this approach.)
Note: their claim that The Soviets are making some mileage with
the President considers SDI "non-negotiable". It would seem
desirable to make clear publicly that SDI research is
non-negotiable, but that we are prepared not only to discuss, but
to negotiate appropriate restraints on deployment, so long as it
is in conjunction with offensive weapons reduction.
START:
SECRET/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY B8 Foe- 14/4#8258 RW 3/80/13
SECRET/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY
-2-
We probably should not change our current START position in any
major way until the Soviets make a forthcoming counter to our
most recent proposals. However, if negotiations become more
serious on their part, the following might be a possibility:
-- Drop proposal to ban mobile ICBM's in return for
legitimation of Midgetman. [Note: This would probably require
legitimizing the SS-25 and therefore should be contingent upon
limitations based on warheads, not launchers, to provide an
incentive to move toward single-warhead launchers. It might. also
be coupled with a commitment to replace all multiple warhead
mobiles to single warhead missiles within a specified time-frame
-- say, ten years.]
INF:
Since the main thing the Soviets are looking for (I believe) in
any settlement is removal of the Pershing II's, I think we should
basically stick with our current proposal, or alternatively the
one of November 1, with the proviso that if the Soviets accept no
reference to British and French systems, we could negotiate on
the timing and magnitude of reductions in the Far East -- so long
as the ultimate goal is zero.
Nuclear Testing:
I believe that the principal Soviet motivation on this whole
issue is to put an end to excalibur, which seems to cause them
genuine and deep concern (maybe because they have done extensive
work themselves in this area and fear that we will solve some of
the problems which have eluded them).
This aside, Gorbachev has now invested so much political capital
in the issue that any gesture in his direction will be of some
value to him.
Trade-offs available to us are probably limited, but if the idea
of proposing a time-limited moratorim on both nuclear tests and
missile tests can fly, this could provide an opening for linking
offensive weapons reduction with testing limitations and at the
same time give Gorbachev something he can claim internally is a
concession from us.
If it is impossible to make such a proposal, we could consider
proposing a diminishing number of nuclear tests, and perhaps a
lower threshhold, provided we can get a better verification
regime and there is an agreement to reduce otfensive nuclear
weapons.
MBFR:
SECRET/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY
SECRET/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY
-3-
-- Agree to negotiate on Gorbachev's "Atlantic to Urals"
conventional weapons concept if Soviets agree to Western
proposals regarding verification of MBFR reductions.
Human Rights/Trade
-- Loosen political controls on export licensing in response to
progress in Jewish emigration, family reunification, and release
of notable political prisoners.
|- Convey privately to Gorbachev that President is willing to
look seriously at much broader economic cooperation in context of
an offensive arms reduction agreement, greater restraint in
regional conflicts, and better human rights performance.
Regional Conflicts:
It is hard to find direct trade-offs here, since we must not go
down the road of trading off one area for another (condominium).
However, in private, we perhaps can be more explicit, in
describing what we would be prepared to do in specific situations
in response to certain Soviet actions. Examples:
-- Afghanistan: Perhaps offer to use influence to reduce
transport of military equipment across border in proportion to
any reduction of Soviet troops on the ground and in the context
of a timetable for complete withdrawal. (Might also be coupled
with requirement that Soviet troops cease offensive operations
against Mujaheddin during withdrawal period.) [Note: practically
would be very hard to do, and we should not admit officially that.
we are supplying the muj.]
-- Lıbya: Perhaps see if the Soviets would be interested in
deal whereby we would commit ourselves not to strike Libyan
territory in the future, except in response to direct military
attacks on our forces, if the Soviets terminate supplies of
military equipment and advisors to Qaddafi. (A private
commitment to them, not a public or legal commitment.) [I'm a
bit dubious about this, but if we are unlikely to strike again
soon anyway, we might at least float the idea privately with
them.]
a
Obviously, some of these ideas are relatively off the wall and
would require more thought and checking before doing anything
about them.
There are many other potential ones in specific bilateral areas,
but at this point I have concentrated primarily on the larger
issues.
SECRET/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY
SECRÉT/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY
DRAFT PERSONAL LETTER TO GORBACHEV
Dear Mr. General Secretary:
Now that I have returned from my trip to East Asia, I want
to express in more direct fashion my sympathy for the Soviet
citizens who have been affected by the accident at the Chernobyl
nuclear power plant. I know that you and your officials are
working diligently to contain the effects of the accident and to
assist those affected, and you have my sincere best wishes for
your success. As I indicated to you before, if there is anything
we can do to help, we stand ready and willing.
Industrial accidents, of course, occur in all countries. As
political leaders, our duty -- it seems to me -- is to see that
our specialists learn from them in order to prevent them in the
future. This is a common problem of all industrialized nations,
and this is why there has been so much interest outside the
Soviet Union in the details of what happened at the Chernobyl
reactor. Since we all have an interest in making nuclear power
safe, we have a common interest in learning from mishaps wherever
they may occur.
I want you to know that the United States would like to
develop a more cooperative relationship with the Soviet Union on
these and other industrial safety issues. I hope we both can
think in these terms as we look to the future.
I also hope that we can proceed as soon as possible in
dealing constructively with the various issues about which we
have corresponded recently. Therefore, I await with interest
your comments on the ideas I conveyed through Secretary Dobrynin
in March and those in my earlier letters.
With personal regards,
Sincerely yours,
FOir 114/4# 8259 SECRÉT/SENSITIVE/EYES ONIY RW 3/20/13
SECRET/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY
NOTIONAL PLAN FOR ELIMINATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
Three phases, lasting minimum of 5 years each, but of a
sufficient duration to achieve the objectives of each. (Second
and third phases are likely to take longer than five years, since
they will require basic changes in Soviet habits and practices.)
Nevertheless, if plan is issued, public position is that it could
be done by the Year 2000 if we start now and keep up momentum.
Phase One:
-- 50% reduction of nuclear weapons in appropriate categories;
-- INF reduced to zero world-wide;
-- Elimination of any imbalance in first-strike capabilities;
-- Verifiable CW ban;
-- BW verification regime;
-- Exрanded CBM's;
-- Compliance with all agreements to satisfaction of both
parties;
-- Reduction of superpower military involvement in regional
conflicts;
-- Effective international actions against terrorism, including
quarantine of states sponsoring terrorism and of groups committed
to it, and ban on military supplies or military training to such
countries and groups.
-- Agreement on verification measures to limited nuclear testing;
further limitations on testing as nuclear weapons are reduced.
-- Tightened non-proliferation regime;
-- Substantial improvements in citizen-to-citizen contacts and
the flow of information across national boundaries.
-- MBFR agreement to establish verification measures during
time-limited freeze.
Phase Two:
-- Further reductions on conventional weapons, world wide;
SECRET/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY
Foe-114/48264
Rins 3/20/15
SECRET/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY
-2-
-- Agreed, verifiable limits on use of military force outside
national boundaries;
-- Termination of direct or indirect superpower military
involvement in regional conflicts; peaceful settlement of major
regional conflicts;
-- Establishment of free contacts and information flow across
national borders, including:
a. No restrictions on travel of one's own citizens to
foreign countries;
b. No restrictions on travel of foreigners in one's own
country:
c. No restrictions, legal or administrative, on contact of
one's citizens with foreigners;
d. Reserved access in the mass media for foreign opinion;
e. Right to establish cultural and information centers, and
outlets for periodical, book and VCR sales, in the other country,
at the sole discretion of the "sending" country;
f. Elimination of national legislation which makes the
expression of divergent opinion a criminal act; effective
guarantees of the freedom of speech.
Negotiations with other nuclear powers to achieve a
substantial additional reduction of nuclear weapons -- at least
50% overall.
-- Negotiations on conditions for a CTB, to take effect in
third stage.
-- Reduction of strategic controls on trade.
-- Agreements on role to be played by defensive weaponry.
Third Stage:
Fine-tune and extend various verification measures developed
in previous stages;
-- Establish in practice the habits of openness and restraint
from use of military force negotiated earlier;
-- Eliminate all strategic and political controls on trade;
SECRÉT/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY
SECRET/SENSITIVE/EYES ONLY
-3-
-- Negotiate a legal enforcement regime for a world free of
nuclear and other mass destruction weapons, and for the control
of the level and use of conventional weapons;
-- Deploy agreed systems of strategic defense;
-- As these measures go into place and are proven in practicе,
proceed to the total elimination of all nuclear weapons in final
stages.