To the readers of CHERNOBYL -ITS IMPACT ON SWEDEN This is the first comprehensive publication in English dealing with the radiation risks in Sweden from the Chernobyl accident and the countermeasures taken. It purports to give an overview of the very extensive in-formation that is available from Sweden in various pub-lications as well as in the form of raw data. The expected readers are radiation protection experts in other countries and in international organisations. Data and analyses have been presented in English also from other Swedish bodies such as the National Defence Research Institute and the National Food Administration. The report contains addresses to several such organisa-tions. An elementary description of the accident consequences has been published by the Swedish National Institute of Radiation Protection. It is a direct translation of a report aimed at the various non specialist Swedish authorities handling the accident consequences. The report is entitled ''Chernobyl -fallout, measurements and consequences". This publication in English might be of interest also to specialists, as an example of a simplified account of the events. Scientific reports on what happened in Sweden will con-tinue to appear at conferences, in scientific journals and so on. Several articles have already been prepared for publication and a large number of scientific institu-tions are involved. Gunnar Bengtsson Director General Swedish National Institute of Radiation Protection 
Chernobyl -  Its Impact on Sweden 1. Emergency organization The organization for radiological emergencies in Sweden is mainly based on the needs that may arise from the 12 reactors in the national nuclear power program. The organization has a regional character in that the responsibility in an accident situation rests with the highest county authority -the county council -in each of the five counties in which there is a major nuclear installation (the four power plants Oskarshamn, Barseback, Ringhals and Forsmark, and the Studsvik research center). In case of an emergency, each of these county councils has at its disposal the county alarm center, the local radio stations and the police, coast guard and fire-fighting organizations. Special communication channels between the various authorities and the Nuclear Power Facilities have been installed and extensive training of the relevant personnel categories has taken place. On the national level the National Institute of Radiation Protection (SSI) has the overall responsibility for the emergency planning outside the nuclear power plants and for providing the county authorities with advice and instructions for planning. In the event of an accident the SSI shall give advice to the county council rescue command. For that purpose the SSI has the responsibly of organizing a special task force with radiation protection experts from the institute, reactor engineering experts from the Nuclear Power Inspectorate (SKI) and specialists in meteorology and protection of the population. The tasks for this group are to analyse the emergency situation, give prognoses of the radiological consequences and to co-ordinate the various activities with measuring ionizing radiation. This task force is also supposed to be called in for all emergencies or accident situations in which the radiation of the public from ionizing radiation must be taken into consideration. ~ith the exception of the special task force at SSI the emergency planning described above covers only emergencies and accidents in the Swedish nuclear power industry and 5 out of Sweden's 24 counties. In other nuclear emergencies of non-domestic origin the "nuclear" counties may extend their authority to neighbouring ones. For the country at large, the Government takes the responsibility through the National Institute of Radiation Protection. Situations of this kind arose in the early 1960s, when considerable fall-out from above-ground weapons testing was foreseen. More recently there have been two instances when there was a risk that nuclear-powered satellites would reenter the atmosphere over Swedish territory. The latest situation is that arising from the Chernobyl accident, and this has put the heaviest demand on the organization so far. 
2. 2. Early chronology of the Chernobyl emergency At around 10 a.m. on April 28, the SS! was notified that increased radiation levels were observed at the Forsmark nuclear power plant. The local county alarm centre was also notified. Gate monitors had sounded the alarm as employees were leaving the plant after having crossed open ground between the buildings and the gate. Although no abnormal radiation levels were observed inside the reactor buildings or from the stacks, a plant alert was declared, resulting in the evacuation of all personnel not required for the immediate operation of the plant. The local radio station was informed of the observations and the measures taken. The SS! special emergency task force was convened at the SSI Stockholm headquarters in accordance with preexisting plans, at 10.30 a.m. Shortly thereafter information was received about abnormal radiation levels at the Studsvik research center, about 200 km down the coast from Forsmark. Contact was established with the other three nuclear power plants, who also during the afternoon reported inreased air and ground activity in their vicinity. In addition, contacts were taken with the Finnish Centre for Radiation and Nuclear Safety and with the Riso Research Centre in Denmark. They confirmed that increased background radiation and airborne contamination had been registered in both Finland and Denmark. The National Defence Research Institute (FOA) operates a national network of highly sensitive air sampling stations designed for verification of nuclear test bans. When FOA at 12.15 was notified of the presumed release at Forsmark they immediately analyzed the sample just taken from the Stockholm station. From several radionuclide ratios it was evident that a reactor accident had occured somewhere. The FOA system incorporates a link to SMHI, the Swedish Metrorological and Hydrological Institute, on which automatically each morning receptor oriented air parcel trajectories are transfered. The Stockholm trajectories that morning sshowed the air coming from Latvia/Lithuania, White Russia and Ukraine in the Soviet Union. All Swedish reactors could thus be excluded and several sites in USSR (Ignalia, Rovno, Chernobyl, Kursk and Novovoronezhiskiy) were, according to this analysis, candidate accident sites. These conclusions were reported to SSI around 1300. The FOA air sampling network consists of several stations around the country (Fig. 1). The filters are normally changed three times a week but starting on April 28 samples were taken much more frequently, for periods of 1  -3 hours. In these early filters around 40 different radionuclides were identified. 
3. The FOA surveillance system also includes air filter collectors which can be mounted under the wings of ''Lansen" jet fighter aircraft flown by the Air Force. On the afternoon of April the 28th these planes collected samples along the eastern border 300 m above the Baltic Sea. A scan was also made at different altitudes up to 12 km. This was done partly to exclude the remote possibility of the event being due to accidental reentry of a reactor powered satellite. Direct in-cloud measurements were carried out by FOA in the evening of the 28th, utilizing a mobile germanium spectrometer on a  Marine helicopter. On that flight doserate meters also showed the contaminated cloud to be between 200 and 1000 m above sea level with a maximum at around 700 m. Dating from the times of frequent above-ground weapons testing around 1960, the SSI has had a network of 25 permanent, continuously registering gamma stations (Fig 1). A systematic collection of data from these stations was initiated already before lunch. The SSI emergency organization was succ~ssively enlarged to include experts from the Nuclear Power Inspectorate (SKI), the National Defense Research Institute (FOA), the National Board of Civil Defence (Cfs) and the National Institute for Meteorology and Hydrology (SMHI). Many external organizations were drawn upon for measurements: FOA, the nuclear power stations, the Swedish Geological Co (SGAB), the Department of Radiophysics at the University of Lund and many other research institutes. The SSI emergency center was manned around the clock for the first few weeks. As the fall-out situation became clearer, cooperation was established with the national authorities for food administration, agriculture and occupational health. 3. Measurements and results Ground and air measurements The radiation level started to rise at some of the gamma stations on April 27 as the first cloud of contaminated air from the Chernobyl accident reached Sweden. The air activity reached a maximum around April 29. Another, cloud of contaminated air entered Sweden from the south-east resulting in a lesser maximum in air contamination around May 9. This second maximum affected mainly the south and south-west parts of Sweden. During the first few days the measurement of air activity was of foremost importance, both in order to see how the situation was developing and to estimate initial doses from the cloud (direct and inhalation dose). The National Defence Research Institute provided data from their ground-level stations and from daily 
6. measurements have generally given more favourable results than were predicted from ground and grass activity. In general, cesium concentrations in dairy milk have increased when the cows were let out for out-door grazing, but have stabilized at a low level as can be seen from Fig. 8. The ratio Sr-90/Cs-137 in different samples is of the order of 1 per cent. In some milk samples, however, with low activity concentrations the measured ratio have been higher. This is caused by the Sr-90 background from the atmospheric nuclear weapons tests in the 1960s. The activity in drinking water from municipal water supplies and private wells is now lower than 0.01 kBq/1. In May some wells vere temporarily contaminated by surface water during the snow-thaw period resulting in higher concentrations. As for other foodstuffs, products that might have been affected have not yet been ready for the market to any appreciable extent. An extensive, long-term monitoring program is being carried out by the National Food Administration (SLV) in collaboration with SS!. This comprises both tests of the various foodstuffs and so-called food basket investigations. In principle, the same action level is applied to all foodstuffs as to milk (i e, 0.3 kBq Cs-137 per.kg or litre). Meat from domestic animals having grazed in the more contaminated areas has generally shown concentrations well below the limit. However, in some instances cesium values near the limit have been observed for beef, which has led to more detailed control in the pertinent regions. In sheep, the problem may be more pronounced due to different grazing habits. The meat from several adult animals has had to be discarded after slaughter because the limiting value has exceeded (by at most a factor 4). A slight degradation of the situation may be expected later in the season as grazing takes place closer to the ground and young animals feed more extensively on grass. For game, the limiting value i s clearly exceeded in the highly contaminated regions. So far, samples have  been obtained mainly from animals killed by traffic. Although the mean i s below the limit, the following peak values have been reported: for hare; around 5 kBq/ kg, venison; 8 kBq/kg, woodcock; 16 kBq/kg, and moose; 1  kBq/kg. The situation will be closely monitored. No meat with an activity concentration exceeding 0.3 kBq/kg will be marketed. In accordance with a recent decision by the National Environmental Protection Agency individual high values do not justify general restrictions for the hunting season. For woodcock t hough there is a recommendation issued in June not to hunt those birds due to their high cesium concentrations. 
7. For fish in the sea only very low cesium concentrations have been measured. Also fish in fresh water in the south and northernmost parts of Sweden have concentrations well below the limit. In some other areas Cs-137 concentrations up to many kBq/kg have been measured. There are, however, large differences between different types of fish and also between different lakes, even when the lakes are close together. The National Food Administration has an extensive measuring program in progress. For vegetable foodstuffs, values above the permissible level have been obtained in the more highly contaminated areas primarily for early species that were well developed at the time of the fall-out, such as chives, parsley and nettles (at most 3-4 kBq/kg). For later species, such as rhubarb, lettuce, berries and potatoes, no alarming values have so far been reported, but the situation will be closely watched throughout the growing season. The most pronounced long-term problem seems to arise in connection with reindeer breeding, which is the main livelihood of the Lapps. Already after the weapon fall-out in the 1960s, it was found that the cesium uptake is exceptionally high in reindeer, mostly due to their uniform diet of reindeer lichen. Reindeer killed in the highly contaminated regions after the accident show cesium concentrations at or above the permissible, in a large fraction of the cases more than 10 kBq/kg. The levels cannot be counted on to decrease to levels below 0.3 kBq/kg over the coming years in the highest contaminated areas without special countermeasures. As may be expected from the general activity situation, no alarming concentrations have been found in humans. The values in mothers' milk have been very low -   below 0.025 kBq/1 of I-131. The measurements were carried out shortly after the cloud passage. Some whole-body measurements are in progress. 4. Countermeasures and their effects In an accident situation the existing limits for permissible releases cannot automatically be applied. The ALARA philosophy must be the guiding principle, i.e. the radiation doses should be kept as low as is reasonably achievable, with due consideration to economic and social costs. In the face of the Chernobyl fall-out situation there was no firm basis for detailed considerations of a formal nature. In other words, neither available information nor time permitted cost-benefit or similar analyses at the level of scientific sophistication attempted under normal circumstances. Instead, common sense and rule of thumb analyses supplemented by very coarse cost-benefit considerations had to be used. It is interesting to note that both the types of 
